<!-- generated by scripts/sync_cards.py — do not edit manually -->
---
title: "Steward of Gondor"
ringsdb_id: "01026"
type: Attachment
sphere: Leadership
cost: 2
traits: [Gondor, Title]
unique: true
pack: "Core Set"
pack_code: "Core"
position: 26
deck_limit: 3
tags: [card, attachment, leadership]
---

# Steward of Gondor ◆

> [!tip] 👑 Attachment · Cost: **2** · Leadership

*Gondor. Title.*

---

Attach to a hero.
Attached hero gains the **_Gondor_** trait.
**Action:** Exhaust Steward of Gondor to add 2 resources to attached hero's resource pool.

---

> *"It was commanded yesterday."*
> — Denethor, The Return of the King

**Pack:** [[Core Set]] #26

---

## Notes

<!-- Tips, combos, and strategy notes -->

**[[Back to Basics - A Killer Deck Using Cards from 1 Core Set]]**
- * Yes, this is a 44-card deck. Why? Because IMHO these are the only cards in the core set worth including in the deck. Just about everything else in the box (not including Tactics cards) is of situational use at best, and will just dilute the deck. if you're going with the constraint of a single Core set, you really shouldn't be handicapping yourself by forcing a 50-card deck. If you really want a 50-card minimum, get another Core set and add extra copies of [[Sneak Attack]], [[Steward of Gondor]], [[Northern Tracker]], [[A Test of Will]], [[Unexpected Courage]] and [[Henamarth Riversong]], or start adding cards from expansion packs as you get them.
- * [[Steward of Gondor]] will usually go on Eowyn, since the more expensive cards in this deck are the Spirit ones. However, I have played it on Theodred if I have Faramir and several other leadership cards in my opening hand. In that case, you need to be sure to always quest with Theodred and Eowyn and give the resource to Eowyn so she can build up her pool.
- * In most quests, on the first turn you'll quest with [[Théodred]] and [[Éowyn (Spirit)|Éowyn]] (giving the resource to Eowyn unless you have Steward of Gondor in hand), leaving [[Beravor]] back to defend or attack if need be. Then if you don't need Beravor for combat, you can (and should) exhaust her to draw two cards.

**[[The One Deck]]**
- The other aspect that makes Elrond a great hero in this deck is of course his ability to pay for allies of any sphere. With [[Arwen Undómiel]] discarding and [[Steward of Gondor]], he can play a big ally directly from your hand every turn.
- A no-brainer in this deck. Amazing stats to get for free, and in a pinch he can act as an expensive Stargazer to set up Vilya. Sometimes I've used him to move a [[Steward of Gondor]] from my hand to my deck to play it with Vilya, since there's no other way to play that card in this deck.
- In this deck, Elrond often gets [[Steward of Gondor]] and a  from Vilya, so he can fuel a ton of card draw with Elven-light if he needs to. Especially once [[Glorfindel]] hits the table and you can start discarding Elven-light multiple times per round.

**[[Seastan's Single Core Set Solo]]**
- 2. Resources: Steward of Gondor goes on Eowyn. This allows her to quickly afford expensive cards like [[Northern Tracker]] and [[The Galadhrim's Greeting]]. [[Théodred]]'s resource should go on the hero that is going to need it next round. Once [[Beravor]] gets [[Unexpected Courage]], she can both quest and draw each turn, and becomes eligible for [[Théodred]]'s resource.
- Try to mulligan for [[The Galadhrim's Greeting]]. The extra turns you buy yourself before needing to engage the Hill Troll are worth more than a hand containing [[Steward of Gondor]]. If you find that you can't handle the Hill Troll once you engage him, one trick I like to do is save up resources and play [[Son of Arnor]] to engage the troll during the planning phase, then slap down a [[Forest Snare]] on it right away, so you never have to deal with its attacks.

**[[Seastan's Boromir]]**
- For the majority of quests, the hardest part is surviving the initial rounds until you get set up. This is solved by putting a Gondorian Shield on Boromir, as it allows him to hold off enemies easily for several rounds. During this time you try to look for A Good Harvest and Steward of Gondor. Steward goes on Boromir and he starts to collect many resources. Eventually you attach Gondorian Fire and Blood of Numenor and he can now defend and kill pretty much anything. If you want to feel for yourself how incredibly powerful this combo is, try using it against Nightmare Conflict at the Carrock, and have Boromir defend all the trolls then take them all out the same turn they enter play. With multiple copies of Gondorian Fire he can easily take out The Watcher, The Balrog, Smaug, etc., all by himself.
 
This whole campaign has really opened my eyes to the power of Boromir. Is an encounter card requiring that you exhaust a hero/character? Is an enemy making an immediate attack you weren't counting on? Did a condition attachment turn up that punishes the attached hero for being exhausted at the end of a phase? No big deal. I just wish there had been a situation in one of the many quests that required me to use Boromir's second ability!
 
Glorfindel and Galadriel help with the other aspect of the game - questing. With Nenya and a spirit ally in your opening hand, this deck can be questing for 10 on turn 1. But for quests that don't require this I tend to hold back and use Galadriel's card draw to set up Boromir. Her Mirror is responsible for bringing together Harvest and Steward in about 75% of my games. For location-heavy quests, use her Mirror to grab Asfaloth.
 
It doesn't look like there is much threat reduction in the deck given its dependence on Boromir. I initially had more but found it isn't needed. Between Galadriel, her Handmaidens, Elrond's Council (and Tomb), and Gandalf, I've only lost once or twice due to threat.

**[[My strongest Core Set deck for solo play - revised for 2022]]**
- **[[Stand and Fight]] is just bonkers.** I forgot how good and flexible this card can be, especially with a hero like [[Éowyn (Spirit)|Éowyn]], with an in-built discarding ability. If you choose to put a [[Steward of Gondor]] on her and you'll be able to play every ally (obviously except for [[Gandalf]]) from your hand/discard pile, **in any phase** - I can't express how many times this saved my life ;). **It is also a fantastic resource-smoothing card** (I rarely looked at it this way to be honest). [[Glóin]] is lacking resources for [[Faramir]]? No problem, discard him and put him into play via [[Stand and Fight]] with your pile of blue resources. Remember this nasty location with 5  and single quest point in Journey Along the Anduin? Well, with [[Stand and Fight]] you can play [[Snowbourn Scout]] after the staging step, but before the questing resolution and explore it immediately, effectively boosting your  by 5. It's those little tricks that made me appreciate going back to basics once again and forcing myself to make the most out of every card I have. Seriously, don't underestimate this card - **it elevates the options you have with this deck to another level.** With [[Steward of Gondor]] on [[Éowyn (Spirit)|Éowyn]] you'll be able to play [[Beorn]] in just two rounds and keep him on your table for much longer than in case of simply Sneak-Attacking him into play for a phase. This card will also allow you to bypass the limit of playing one ally per round in Escape from Dol Guldur (play and put into play are totally different things). [[Stand and Fight]] is pure gold.
- **One of the key things is to play [[Self Preservation]] on [[Glóin]]** as soon as you can. It basically turns him into a second [[Steward of Gondor]]. I tend to use him exclusively as a defender against max 3-attack enemies (so that I can heal him completely before the next round), but if you plan to make him a main defender against some stronger foes then [[Protector of Lórien]] is your best friend (another staple from the core set). However, if I manage to draw [[Unexpected Courage]] I tend to play it together with [[Protector of Lórien]] on [[Beravor]] due to her extra point of defence - she will handle the swings of a Hill Troll even more efficiently. And with [[Unexpected Courage]] you'll be able to use her priceless card-drawing ability "for free".
- [[Steward of Gondor]] can be played either on [[Beravor]] (most of the time) or [[Éowyn (Spirit)|Éowyn]], depending on your draw. If you have a hand full of [[Forest Snare]]s and [[Self Preservation]]s, you'll know to whom to attach it. If you want to really abuse [[Stand and Fight]] or you just need to quickly play your [[Unexpected Courage]]s and [[Northern Tracker]], [[Éowyn (Spirit)|Éowyn]] is your target.

**[[Deck Tech Dwarf Starter Deck]]**
- And last, but definitely not least, [[Bifur]] is a huge source of resource fixing for the deck. A ton of great allies are in lore, and being able to pass resources to him helps get them out quickly. If you get [[Steward of Gondor]] in play, you can also trivially spread the resources around between two of your spheres. This can be especially handy when your pool is small because of the limited access to Songs and A Good Harvest.
- My opening hand has a good number of low cost dwarf allies, so I keep it. I could mulligan for [[Steward of Gondor]] or some card draw, but early allies are really important here.
- 1. [[Sneak Attack]] and [[Valiant Sacrifice]] help you turn two leadership resources into two new cards. And if you include [[Gandalf]], you get even more draw or another bit of utility.
1. [[Durin's Song]] is a great emergency button when [[Dáin Ironfoot (Leadership)|Dáin Ironfoot]] is defending. This deck has almost all the healing that's available in these three sets, but it's still not a ton. And no spirit means no shadow canceling for a while.
1. [[Lórien's Wealth]] is easier to pay for with [[Bifur]] than you think, because he can easily get 4 resources in two rounds.
1. [[Steward of Gondor]] on Gimli, passing a resource to [[Bifur]] every round is probably what you want for this deck. Unless you've drawn way too many of your leadership cards.
1. I wouldn't worry about maximizing the abilities of the dwarf allies as they come into play. If you can take advantage of them, it's great. But the stats are good enough to play them without it in most cases.

**[[Gaffer Ever After]]**
- Mulligan for [[Steward of Gondor]] and/or [[Resourceful]]. Either card will let you start generating 2  resources per turn. Then, once you draw into either the Gaffer himself or [[Raise the Shire]], you're set to play Gaffer again and again every turn after. We're talking about a 2-card combo where each card has effectively 6 copies in the deck, so it's incredibly easy to set up. Even more so due to [[Drinking Song]] and the fact that the combo pieces are played on the table and do not have to be in your hand at the same time.
