<!-- generated by scripts/sync_cards.py — do not edit manually -->
---
title: "Vilya"
ringsdb_id: "04137"
type: Attachment
sphere: Neutral
cost: 2
traits: [Ring, Artifact]
unique: true
pack: "Shadow and Flame"
pack_code: "SaF"
position: 137
deck_limit: 3
tags: [card, attachment, neutral]
---

# Vilya ◆

> [!abstract] ⚪ Attachment · Cost: **2** · Neutral

*Ring. Artifact.*

---

Attach to Elrond. He gains a (Spirit) resource icon.
**Action:** Exhaust Elrond and Vilya to reveal the top card of your deck. You can immediately play or put into play the revealed card for no cost, if able. Otherwise, move the revealed card to the bottom of your deck.

---

> *...mightiest of the Three.*
> — The Return of the King

**Pack:** [[Shadow and Flame]] #137

---

## Notes

<!-- Tips, combos, and strategy notes -->

**[[The One Deck]]**
- This might not come as much of a shock to people. Vilya decks have always been one of the strongest archetypes in the game. Combined with [[Imladris Stargazer]], you can reliably get out a 4 or 5 cost card for free each turn. Most encounter decks simply cannot keep up with that kind of resource advantage.
- This Vilya deck in particular stands out for 5 reasons:
1. A focus on making Vilya effective very quickly. This means dedicating several card slots ([[Master of the Forge]], [[Heed the Dream]], [[Gather Information]]) to ensure Vilya is found fast, and it means having very few cards in the deck that will be duds if Vilya gets used before an [[Imladris Stargazer]] is found.
- 3. A focus on flexibility. Many quests in this game feature a "gimmick" that you need to counter, so this deck uses a tool-box type approach. Rather than filling the deck with the absolute beefiest allies in terms of raw stats, there are some cards here that are meant to counter certain encounter decks. For example, most of the time threating out is not a problem, and turning up a [[Knight of the White Tower]] with Vilya would be a lot more useful than [[The Galadhrim's Greeting]]. However, in those quests where threat is the main enemy, the Greeting is essential.
- 4. Combat ready on turn 1. Many Vilya decks take a turtling approach, hoping to avoid combat for several turns while their board state comes together. This does not work against the more punishing nightmare quests. Thanks to [[Éowyn (Tactics)|Éowyn]], this Vilya deck can have a very aggressive start, and get over whatever initial hurdle the encounter deck has set up to give itself some breathing room to set up. In theory, this deck could handle a 6  and 4  enemy that start the game engaged with you by questing no one, defending with [[Elrond]] and [[Arwen Undómiel]], and killing both enemies with [[Éowyn (Spirit)|Éowyn]].
- Mulligan for [[Vilya]] or [[Master of the Forge]]. You might consider keeping a hand with [[Gather Information]] if it looks like you'll be able to clear it in a turn or two. If you start with the Master, you will get to see [[Arwen Undómiel]] really pull her weight, because you can discard a card to give [[Elrond]] a resource, then play the Master, exhaust him, hopefully find Vilya, and still have 2 resources leftover to play it. Since the deck has such a high concentration of strong allies, you can start using Vilya on turn 1.
- Occasionally (more often that you might expect), you will start with both Vilya and Stargazer in your opening hand. Again Arwen justifies her inclusion here by allowing you to play both cards and start setting up your Vilya plays from the start.
- Another fantastic start is [[Vilya]]+[[Unexpected Courage]], because right from turn 1 Vilya will feel like i doesn't even cost anything.
- [[Éowyn (Tactics)|Éowyn]] can be considered an early-game card as well. Her ability is extremely useful in making up for the tempo hit you take from spending the first couple turn looking for Vilya. The deck really isn't able to kill anything in the first few turns without her, so she is incredibly powerful against those quests (of which there are several) where the main problem is the starting enemy. So while I try to avoid using her if I don't have to, if I can see that after triggering her I'll be able to avoid combat for a couple rounds, it's normally worth it because by then Vilya will have won the game for me.
- By now you have Vilya and Stargazer up and running, and should be pumping out a 4+ cost ally every turn in addition to the the allies you play with your 4 resources/round from your heroes. If the quest allows you to take your own pace, you can stay in this state for as long as you like. I normally build up my board until the point where I am ready for the final stage of the quest.
- Arwen is one of the best heroes in the entire game, and overall my most-used hero by a large margin. Her ability to regulate the resource/card balance with [[Elven-light]] is incredible, and at the same time she quests well and offers access to the  sphere. But in this particular deck she's just phenomenal. Her extra resource enables a turn 1 [[Master of the Forge]]->[[Vilya]], allowing you to use Vilya 1 turn ahead of when you might otherwise be able to use it. In a Vilya deck, getting an extra use out of Vilya is often like getting an extra 4 or 5 resources. So imagine Arwen with an extra 4 starting resources, and that's what she often feels like in this deck. She also enables the even more awesome turn 1 Vilya+Stargazer. Getting a turn 1 Vilya+[[Unexpected Courage]] is also pretty sweet.
- Not just a Vilya machine in the deck. His impressive stats do get used once you find [[Unexpected Courage]], and his 4 hit points also allow you to take undefended attacks, which I did many, many times. Since you can use [[Jubayr]] to discard the shadow card on the enemy that will be making the undefended attack, you can do this safely, and with Elrond's healing ability, your [[Warden of Healing]] can quickly get rid of the damage. It took me a few games until I discovered how valuable this action advantage can actually be.
- Eowyn's low starting threat helps counteract the threat from Elrond, and her 4  helps offset the loss of Elrond's action early in the game by allowing you to quest for 7 with Arwen while Elrond uses Vilya to get out a defender.
- There are number of allies in here that are great to get out with Vilya, but not so essential that it's worth risking having duplicate dead cards in the deck. Beorn is one of those allies. He can survive attacks from the toughest enemies, which I've found to be particularly good in combination with all the healing in the deck. I ended up using his ability to good effect about 5 times or so.
- These guys ought to be in any self-respecting Vilya deck. You get 10 stats out of a 4-cost ally, with an ability that makes them even better. They're pretty easy to get out even if they end up in your hand, since Eowyn doesn't have much else to pay for.
- Elfhelm is of course a key card against certain quests that have a repeated threat-raising cards. Like Gollum in Return to Mirkwood. He also cancels out Nalir, which is lovely. My favorite is when Local Trouble gets attached to Elrond while Elfhelm is on the table, because all the exhausts for Vilya and all the times I trigger Elrond's healing ability would have otherwise resulted in 20+ threat.
- The major advantage that this deck has over Vilya decks that use the [[Gandalf]] hero is the ability to use Vilya to get Core Set [[Gandalf]] into play for free. His flexibility is ideal for the kind of deck that seeks to be able to beat a wide variety or quests, because he can act as threat reduction in quests that raise your threat, or as direct damage in quests that have a lot of enemies. I think overall I used him for threat reduction the most.
- One trick in this deck regarding Gandalf: You can just keep him on the top of your deck and wait until after staging to see if you're going to need him to kill an enemy that just appeared or for threat reduction to avoid engaging a new enemy. If you don't need him that turn, then you can use Stargazer to swap a permanent ally on top for Vilya, putting Gandalf a couple cards down to do the same thing next turn.
- A no-brainer in this deck. Amazing stats to get for free, and in a pinch he can act as an expensive Stargazer to set up Vilya. Sometimes I've used him to move a [[Steward of Gondor]] from my hand to my deck to play it with Vilya, since there's no other way to play that card in this deck.
- Another powerful ally that is great to get with Vilya, but is also a great target for Arwen's discard. His ability also gives you more opportunities to get rid of [[Elven-light]] so that you can spend all your excess resources on getting new cards.
- The second most important card in the deck. Once you get Vilya you should try to get out a Stargazer ASAP, because until then all your Vilya plays will be done blind.
- I normally exhaust the Stargazer as soon as I play her, unless the encounter deck has cards like Necromancer's Reach, in which case I'll wait until after staging. Since she looks at 5 cards, you can normally set up the next 2 rounds of Vilya, which means that even if you used her in the planning phase in the round you played her, you shouldn't have to use her again until the the end of the combat phase in the round after.
- My strategy for ordering the top 5 cards is somewhat dependent on the quest and the immediate situation, but generally I arrange for high cost cards to be played with Vilya, and low cost cards like [[Heed the Dream]], [[Unexpected Courage]], or [[Master of the Forge]] to be drawn into hand.
- One trick for these guys in a Vilya deck: If there are no great targets for the defense reduction, you can wait until after an enemy is revealed in staging to bring them into play with Vilya.
- Besides Vilya, this is probably the most important card in the deck for the consistency he brings to it. Failing to find Vilya in your opening hand, then dropping this guy down and exhausting him, and seeing Vilya in your top 5 is just marvelous. Then he helps you grab [[Unexpected Courage]], which in this deck amounts to a 2-cost 3/2/3/4 character, or he can thin your deck by grabbing extra copies of Vilya.
- The final use that this guy offers is as a prime chump target. Since he more than pays for himself in a turn or two by grabbing Vilya, I have no problem tossing this guy in front of a Mumak or discarding him to an ally-hate treachery.
- The first version of this deck actually didn't have Steward because I like to build decks without it just to show that you can. But then I decided that this deck wouldn't hold anything back. So I put in 2 copies, not 3 because it actually isn't critical and I want to minimize duplicate uniques in the deck in case I need to blind Vilya. It also has the bonus of being single-core friendly.
- Steward obviously goes on Elrond once, and effectively lets you play 2 huge allies every turn - one with Vilya and one with his resources. He can never really have too much, since the spirit icon you get with Vilya allows you to use his resources to draw with [[Elven-light]]. The resources can also be use to ready your [[Warden of Healing]] after healing.
- This card is just amazing in this deck. Since Elrond is going to exhaust every turn for Vilya, [[Unexpected Courage]] is basically like a 2-cost 3/2/3/4 character. You can Vilya+quest, Vilya+defend, or even Vilya+attack. Elrond's starts are so nice that even the second copy of [[Unexpected Courage]] is worth playing on him, since it lets you Vilya+quest+defend.
- A classic staple in any deck with access to . It's so good that I had to include it despite it being a dud when turned up by Vilya (which happened a few times).
- In this deck, Elrond often gets [[Steward of Gondor]] and a  from Vilya, so he can fuel a ton of card draw with Elven-light if he needs to. Especially once [[Glorfindel]] hits the table and you can start discarding Elven-light multiple times per round.
- The main downside is that this is pretty much the worst possible card to ever turn up with Vilya, since it goes straight to the bottom of your deck. But it's good enough that it's worth the risk I think.
- Heed the Dream is mainly here to help you set up your Vilya/Stargazer in the early game, but it has a couple other uses. It's useful for shuffling up your top 5 cards when the Stargazer shows you that they're all bad, and it's useful for grabbing some 1-ofs like [[Faramir]] for a late-game questing push.
- Turning up a Heed the Dream with a blind Vilya is not ideal, but it's not the worst. I often end up being able to grab a Stargazer with it, so in a way I sacrifice one use of Vilya to make all the following uses better.
- In addition to finding your 1x cards, if can be perhaps even more useful by acting as a fourth copy of your most important cards. I'll often keep a starting hand without Vilya if it looks like I'll be able to complete Gather Information in 1-2 turns. And it's often the case that you can, since your heroes start with a whopping 10  among them.
- A: [[Yazan]] and the [[Northern Tracker]] tended to be my go-to discards for Arwen if I hadn't drawn [[Elven-light]] yet. So if you want to try to improve on this deck, you could start there. The Northern Trackers were pretty vital in my win against Rhosgobel, but other than that they were basically just stats, and there are some better options in that department, like [[Prince Imrahil]], [[Ranger of Cardolan]], or [[Knight of the White Tower]]. If you find that you don't often play against quests that really punish your threat you could also easily give up [[The Galadhrim's Greeting]] for more deckspace. Whatever you do, I strongly suggest that any new cards you swap in are cards you would want to see with a blind Vilya in the early game.
